---
title: Writing in Science-week 1(1)
subtitle: 1.1 Introduction; principles of effective writing
tags:
- sci
- writing
desc: 
layout: post
---

from: https://www.coursera.org/learn/sciwrite

### 1.1 Introduction; principles of effective writing

Welcome to the first week of writing in the sciences. I'm Kristin Sainani from Stanford University. For those of you who have been in a course with me before, welcome back, for those of you who are new, it's great to have you. This first week, I'm going to do a small introduction and then we'll jump right into some key principles of effective writing. Some of the goals I have for this course, I'm hoping to get you to rethink your approach to writing, to rethink your writing process, and I'm also hoping to ease some fears that you may have around writing. So this first module is going to address some of those. In my course at Stanford, I always like to start by asking the question, what makes good writing? And feel free to discuss this on the discussion forum later. But for now, I'm going to tell you what I think makes good writing. First and foremost, what makes good writing is that good writing needs to communicate an idea clearly and effectively. This is even more important in scientific writing, because the whole point of scientific writing is to get your results across to other scientists, to policy makers and sometimes even to the lay public. It's all about getting your idea across clearly and effectively. Then there is this other element of good writing and this is really what everybody associates with good writing. Good writing is beautiful, it's elegant and stylish. And I think what happens when a lot of people sit down to write, is that they're worried about this second element. They worried about sounding a certain way, about sounding smarter or sounding elegant. And they spend so much time focusing on this part that they forget about just trying to get their ideas across clearly and effectively, and this leads to all sorts of problems in the writing. So what I want you to do in this class is to keep your focus on one, communicating your idea clearly and effectively. I want you to worry less about that elegant and stylish part. Clear writing just takes having something to say and clear thinking. As scientists, all of us have something to say. We also have clear thinking, so this part really shouldn't be intimidating. What's more intimidating is this elegant and stylish part. People get really afraid that am I going to sound the right way? But in fact, this elegant and stylish part doesn't happen on a first draft. Elegant and stylish writing happens in revision, even for professional writers. A lot of professional writing that you see when you read a magazine, or a novel, that's been through good editing. It didn't sound like that on the first draft, it's been polished up,sometimes by multiple editors. So I don't want you to even worry about elegant and stylish when you're writing your first draft, just worry about getting that idea across in a clear and logical and efficient way. I also like to ask my students the question, what is it that makes a good writer? I'm going to tell you a few of the things that I think people associate with good writers. A lot of people, for example, think that in order to be a good writer you've got to have some sort of inborn talent. And a lot of scientists feel that they weren't born with the writing gene, they were born with a math gene, or the science gene, so they don't feel like they have that inborn talent. Or you might think that it takes years of English and humanities classes to become a good writer, and again, a lot of scientists don't have that. Or maybe you think it takes some kind of artistic nature. Or many people think it takes the influence of alcohol and drugs, or maybe some kind of divine inspiration, some kind of muse. All of these things get associated with good writers, a lot of people think you need these to be a good writer, but in fact, I don't think you need any of these. What I think it takes to be a good writer is that one, as I said before, you need to have something to say. You need to have something that you're passionate about that you want to communicate. And that sounds a little bit trivial but I can't tell you how many times I've had a student sitting in my office, I'm doing editing with them. And I'll say I was confused by what you meant in this paragraph. What is it you were trying to say? And they kind of look at me and go, well, I'm not really sure what I was trying to say in that paragraph. They don't know, and that's why it's a confusing paragraph because they weren't actually sure what they were trying to say. So figure out first what it is that you're trying to say. Then, of course, you need logical and clear thinking. You have to be able to present your arguments in a logical way particularly, in scientific writing. But again, I think most scientists feel very comfortable that they have both of these, they have something to say and they have logical thinking. What you might not have yet is that you may not know a few simple learnable rules of style. And these are the tools that I can teach you in this class. Surprisingly, you may not have ever been taught these before. In fact, in some cases you may have been taught the opposite. These are fairly simple rules that I can teach you, they're easy to learn and once you've learned them it'll be a lot easier for you to write in a clear, effective, and efficient way. So one of the take home messages I have for this course is that good writing can be learned. Good writing is a skill. You don't have to be born with it. You can learn it. And as with any skill, you'll learn it through practice. And we're going to practice a lot in this course. Besides taking this course, there's a few other things you can do to improve your writing. First of all, you can read a lot. Reading is a really good way to learn to be a better writer. And read sources of professional good writing like magazines and novels, non-fiction books, not necessarily the scientific literature. Actually, your first assignment for this course is to go home this week and find time to read something that you wouldn't have had time to read otherwise. Make some time to read something even if it's just a magazine. And pay attention to how professional writers write. Pay attention to some of the tricks they use and try to imitate them. Do as much reading as you can outside of the scientific literature while you're taking this course. If you have time, as I said, writing is a skill so the more you practice, the better you're going to get. If you have a little time, at the beginning or end of each day, try to write in a journal. Can be an old fashioned journal, or an electronic journal, but try to spend a few minutes just practicing some of the techniques that we're going to talk about in this course. I also want you to let go of some academic writing habits, some bad habits that you may have picked up by being in academia too long. I call this the deprogramming step. I'm going to try to break you of some of those bad habits. I'm going to point them out to you. A really good tip before you sit down to write about your research is try to talk it out with somebody, a friend who is not necessarily in your discipline. Oftentimes, when we talk about our research, we do it in a more conversational tone, we talk in more simple terms. We actually present our ideas better than when we sit down to write, so talking it out first can really help. Another thing that I'm going to emphasize in this course, is that I want you to actively try when you sit down to write your manuscript, to actively try not to bore your reader. And that might sound funny, but we are all in the same boat here, because we all have to read the scientific literature. You've probably had the experience where you've got this stack of scientific papers that you've gotta read. They're sitting on your desk, and you're dreading reading them because you know they're going to be tedious and they're going to be hard to get through and they're going to be dull. But the scientific literature doesn't have to be that way, we can write in a more engaging and lively and interesting way. So we're going to try to get you to write in that way in this class. Next, stop waiting for inspiration. I have lots of students who tell me, well, I can only write on certain days when I feel inspired, when the moon is in a certain alignment and I have had enough sleep. And they have all of these excuses, why they can't write today. Of course, this is just a procrastination technique. You don't need any special muse or inspiration to be able to write. You do need to be prepared to write and that's something that we're going to talk about in this course, but you don't need some kind of special inspiration. So just get over this notion that you have to be inspired in, and get yourself to sit down and write. Another thing that I think is really important to realize is that writing is hard for everyone. You should realize that even for professional writers who do this everyday, there's just something inherently difficult about the task of writing. So if you find writing hard, you're in the same boat as everybody else. Writing is hard for everyone, even professional writers. And I think that just knowing that can help to reduce some of the anxiety that you may have around writing. Also in this course, I'm going to try to give you a lot of tips to help make your writing easier. I'm also going to emphasize revision in this course. A lot of scientists don't spend enough time on revision. They really worry over the first draft, they try to get it perfect on the first draft, and they don't give enough weight to revision. So I'm going to try to get you to flip that. And to go through the first draft quickly, just get it down on paper, and then put your emphasis on revision. The elegance part, that happens on revision, not on the first draft. So just barrel through that first draft and then spend time revising. Another thing I'm going to teach you in this course is how to cut ruthlessly. It's hard to cut your own words, but you have to learn how to not become too attached to your own words. You have to learn how to be a ruthless editor. I'm going to do a lot of ruthless editing examples in this course. If you send me something to edit,I warn you, I am a ruthless editor, and sometimes, people will send me something like an abstract where they say, it's 250 words. It needs to be less than 200. Can you help me? And I, of course, take that as a challenge and I'll send it back to them with 150 words. So to learn how to cut. We're going to talk all about, this week, about how to cut clutter from your work. If you can, find a good editor. Somebody who can edit your work, a spouse, a friend, a significant other if they're willing, can all be good editors. Preferably, somebody outside of your discipline, who can look at your work and give some feedback. Tell you whether it's written at a level that they can understand. Tell you where it's confusing, if its boring. We're going to do peer editing in this course, so you'll have an opportunity to find some good editors, hopefully, in this course. You might find somebody in this course who you work well with, and you could continue editing each other's work even after the course ends. Finally, the last thing I'm going to emphasize in this course is that I want you to start taking some risks in your writing. Scientific, academic writing can feel very confining. You're kind of forced into this little box. You're told there are all these rules that you don't dare break. It really boxes you in. It doesn't let you find your own voice as a writer. So, I'm going to encourage you to take some risks. Go ahead and put something in your writing that's a little bit funny, put something that's provocative. I want you to take some risks, and find your own voice, as a writer.    

### 1.2 Examples of what not to do

In this second module I'm going to go through some specific examples. These are representative of what's out there in the scientific literature. They're also examples of what not to do. I want to start my slides with a disclaimer. I pick up snippets, sentences, paragraphs from various things I read, sometimes my students' work, sometimes the scientific literature, and I'm often critiquing that writing. So I tend to omit exact citations from my slides, just so that it doesn't appear that I'm critiquing any particular author. Really, these examples just typify what's out there in the scientific literature. I want to start with a sentence that I was reading in an article in the journal of Clinical oncology. This is one of the top cancer journals, and this was the first sentence of the introduction section. This is when the authors are supposed to be drawing you into their paper. And it reads, adoptive cell transfer, immunotherapy is based on the ex vivo selection of tumor-reactive lymphocytes, and their activation and numerical expression before reinfusion to the autologous tumor-bearing host. Now I have a background in biology, and I still find this sentence hard to read. I have to struggle to get through it. And that's a shame because, if your reader has to struggle to get through your sentences, they may not finish reading your paper. They certainly aren't going to understand your ideas. So ask yourself the question, is this sentence easy to understand? I don't think it is. Is the sentence enjoyable and interesting to read? No, it's not enjoyable, when you have to struggle just to get through it. And really the scientific literature should be enjoyable and interesting to read. Here's another fun example. This was from a paper I was reading from the journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology. It was actually an interesting article that had some practical implications about the way that we apply sunscreen. And so I was trying to write about it for a very general audience. I was reading along in the article and then I get to this sentence. These findings imply that the rates of ascorbate radical production and its recycling via dehydroascorbate reductase to replenish the ascorbate pool are equivalent at the lower irradiance, but not equivalent at higher irradiance with the rate of an ascorbate radical production exceeding its recycling back to ascorbate. All right, you can see that this sentence is incredibly difficult to read. Even if you had a strong background in chemistry it still very difficult to understand. So you again want to ask yourself, is this sentence readable? I don't think it's very readable. Is it written to inform or to obscure? And I ask this question because, sometimes when I'm reading the scientific literature I wonder, if the authors are being intentionally obscure, intentionally obtuse. If they're intentionally trying to obscure their material in the hopes that if nobody understands it, then nobody can poke holes in their research. Certainly we don't want to be doing that, certainly the point of scientific writing is to inform. I'm going to point out one feature that's commen to both of these two passages that I just showed you. In both of those examples, they took some nice spunky verbs and turned them into clunky nouns. This is incredibly common in academic writing, but it makes the writing hard to read. Because verbs drives sentences whereas nouns slow them down. In that first example, we have selection, activation, expression, and reinfusion. Those are all nouns that are dragging the sentence down, but they could've been verbs. Select, activate, express, and reinfuse. If the same problem in this second sentence, we get production and recycling which are nouns that could have been verbs. To produce, to recycle. Writing with verbs is actually something we're going to spend a lot of time on next week in our unit on verbs. So I took that second sentence, and I tried to translate it into something understandable. Here's what I came up with. These findings imply that at lower radiation ascorbate radicals are produced and recycled at the same rate, but at higher radiation they are produced faster than they can be recycled back to ascorbate. It's not the most exciting sentence ever, but I think it's at least understandable now. You can get the gist of what the authors are trying to say. Notice what I did here, is I stripped a lot of extra words from that sentence. I've got it down to about half the size of the original. And then I turned those nouns, production and recycling back into verbs, produced and recycled. I want to get across two themes in this course. One is that even though we're writing about science, about complex and technical things, that doesn't mean we have to use complex language. We can get across complex and technical ideas even with simple language. If we did that, scientific writing would be a lot easier and more enjoyable to read. And you want to aim to write things that are easy to understand, and are enjoyable for your reader. I love this quote, I pulled this out of something I read back in 2003, and I kept it in my slides ever since, because I think it makes a really important point. The author writes, my professor friend told me that in his academic world, publish or perish is really true. He doesn't care if nobody reads it or understands it as long as it's published. And there's a hint of truth here right? There is pressure to publish, and sometimes it may feel like you're just trying to get something published, and get it on your CV. That's a shame, because obviously that shouldn't be the goal of science. If nobody cares about your work and nobody reads it, then obviously, it's not going to move science along at all. So when you're sitting down to write, I want you to think very carefully about making sure that, your reader understands your writing, and that your reader cares about your writing. You want to make you reader care. If you do that, they're more likely to pick up on your ideas, they're more likely to cite your work, and it's more likely to move science forward. 

### 1.3 Overview, principles of effective writing

In this next module, I'm going to go through another example, and use it to illustrate some of the principles of effective writing that I'm going to be talking about this week as well as next week. Here's an example that I pulled out of Cell, which is a top biology journal, with a high impact factor, something around 30. Again, this example is typical of the scientific literature. It reads, dysregulation of physiologic microRNA, miR, activity has been shown to play an important role in tumor initiation and progression, including gliomagenesis. Therefore, molecular species that can regulate miR activity on their target RNAs without affecting the expression of relevant mature miRs may play equally relevant roles in cancer. I find this passage hard to read. I have to struggle to figure out exactly what it is the authors were intending to say. I'm going to point out some specific features that make this example difficult to read. First of all, as in some earlier examples we saw, there's the use of nouns rather than verbs. The authors use dysregulation, initiation, progression, and expression. Those are all nouns that could've been verbs. Dysregulate, initiate, progress, and express. Verbs move sentences along, whereas nouns slow the reader down. The others also use some vague words. The problem with vague words is that the reader cannot get a concrete picture in their head of what the author is talking about. So these vague words don't add anything. For example, the word physiologic here, physiology is something that's really broad, so I'm not exactly sure what the authors mean by physiologic. It doesn't add anything for me, and then we get to molecular species. Molecular species could be a lot of things, it doesn't give me a concrete picture of what the authors are talking about. Also note the use of unnecessary jargon and acronyms in this passage. We get the term gliomagenesis, which is a fancy way to say the formation of glioma. So there's an easier and more direct way to say that. We also get an interesting acronym or initialism in this example. The acronym is actually the reason that I picked this particular example, I find it amusing. The authors abbreviated the term microRNA as miR. It's amusing because RNA is already itself an acronym, so the authors have made an acronym of an acronym. This just illustrates how ridiculous and widespread acronyms and initialisms are in the scientific literature. Authors love acronyms. They throw them in all over the place. The problem with acronyms is that, unless they are standard terms that everybody is familiar with, most readers aren't going to know your acronym. This means that every time they get to your acronym in the paper, they're going to have to stop and go and look that acronym up. It's like they have to translate a foreign word. This is really annoying to readers and it also greatly slows their reading down. So we don't want to do that obviously. You can see in this case, there's no benefit to using the acronym. You're only saving a few letters here by using miR rather than microRNA, but it completely slows the reader. So I'm going to encourage you, or advise you to avoid the use of acronyms, other than those that are completely standard that most people will know. Another thing I want to point out is, in this first sentence the authors use the passive voice. We get the passive verb here is, has been shown. Now, if you're not familiar with the difference between active and the passive voice, don't worry. We're going to go into this in great detail next week in our unit on verbs. But for now, I'll just point out that this verb construction is awkward. The passive voice is hard to read because it's not the way we talk. To give a simple example, take the sentence, she throws the ball. That's in the active voice. To turn that into the passive voice, you would say the ball is thrown by her. And you can hear how awkward that sounds. Again, we'll go into much more detail about this next week. Now the second sentence is actually in the active voice but it has a different problem with the verb. The subject of that sentence is molecular species. The main verb or the predicate of that sentence is may play. So notice we don't get to the main verb for a long time. We have molecular species and then this long descriptive clause, and then we finally get to the main verb at may play. The problem is that the reader is waiting for the verb. Until you give the reader the verb, the reader doesn't know where you're going with the sentence. So putting too much distance between the subject of the sentence and the main verb is a problem. That's another thing that we'll talk about in great detail next week in our unit on verbs. So I took that passage and I rewrote it to try to fix some of these issues. I did not have the authors sitting right next to me while I was doing this edit, so I am not 100% sure that this is what they were trying to say, but I think I got the gist of it. The rewrite says, changes in microRNA expression play a role in cancer, including glioma. Therefore, events that disrupt microRNAs from binding to their target RNAs may also promote cancer. Notice how much shorter and easier to understand this is compared with the original passage. But it still conveys the same ideas. So this leads me to an overview of the specific principles of effective writing that we're going to be talking about this week and next week. The first principle I want you to learn is to cut your words, cut unnecessary words and phrases, get rid of the clutter. We are going to spend the rest of this week talking about cutting clutter. Next week we'll talk in great detail about the use of the active voice rather than the passive voice. And we'll also talk about writing with verbs, using strong verbs, avoiding turning verbs into nouns, and not burying the main verb. But for the rest of this week, we're going to tackle cutting clutter. 