---
title: Writing in Science-week 1(2)
subtitle: 1.1 Introduction; principles of effective writing
tags:
- sci
- writing
desc: 
layout: post
---

### 1.4 Cut the clutter

In this next module, I'm going to teach you how to cut clutter from your writing. I'm going to start with one of my favorite quotes from William Zinsser's classic writing book "On Writing Well". This is a great book to read for this course if you have time. He says, the secret of good writing is to strip every sentence to its cleanest components. Every word that serves no function, every long word that could be a short word, every adverb that carries the same meaning That's already in the verb, every passive construction that leaves the reader unsure of who is doing what. These are the thousand and one adulterants that weaken the strength of a sentence. And they usually occur in proportion to the education and rank. And I find this last part especially amusing Since I do teach many people who are highly educated and high in rank. Today, we're going to practice stripping sentences of all this kind of clutter. I'm going to jump right in here with an example sentence that needs to be stripped of clutter. It reads: "This paper provides a review of the basic tenets of cancer biology study design, using as examples studies that illustrate the methodologic challenges or that demonstrates successful solutions to the difficulties inherent in biological research." You can hear when I'm reading this sentence out loud That there are a lot of extra, unnecessary words in there. I'm going to go through this word by word now. And show just you how much we can cut. First, "this paper provides a review of." This is an instance where we've taken a nice spunky verb, to review, and turned it into a boring noun, a review. And then paired it with a boring verb, provides. So we can just change this back to the verb by saying "this paper reviews." Then we get to of the basic tenets of. Well, this is one of those vague amorphous phrases that doesn't add anything for the reader. It doesn't help the reader understand what is going on here, so we can just cut it. So we get: "this paper reviews cancer biology study design," "using as examples studies that illustrate." When I read that out loud, you can hear how awkward it is, and you can hear the repetition. The word examples means the same thing as studies. We don't need both. So I'm just going to get rid of studies, and say using examples that illustrate. Then we get to methodologic challenges. Well that word, methodologic, is again one of those vague amorphous words that's so broad that it adds nothing for the reader. We've already said that we're talking about study design, so methodology is implied. Then we get to, "Using examples that illustrate the challenges or that demonstrate successful solutions". And notice we have a repetition here. We have illustrate which means the same thing as demonstrate. And I always picture that the author was sitting there and thinking well I already used the word illustrate. I don't want to repeat myself. So I'm going to go to the thesaurus, and find a second word that means the same thing. And they found demonstrate. Okay, if you catch yourself reaching for the thesaurus, to avoid repeating a word, Always ask yourself, Do I even need the second instance of that word at all? Oftentimes, you simply don't need the second instance of the word. In this case, the illustrate can carry over to both the challenges and solutions. We can just say "using examples that illustrate both challenges and solutions." I am also going to strike out the word "successful" here, did you notice that? think about it, is there such a thing as an unsuccessful solution? there isn't, right? The adjective successful is already inherent in the word solution. So we don't need to say successful solutions because solution implies successful. Then we get to this last part. "To the difficulties inherent in biological research." We have another repetition here. We already said challenges and now we're saying difficulties. Again, I'm picturing that author that has gone to the thesaurus to avoid repeating the word challenges and they find difficulties, but just like before, we don't need that repetition at all. We also have this "inherent in biological research." I don't think that adds anything, because we already know that we're talking about biological study design. Biological research is there for just a repetition, so I'm going to take out this entire last bit. So we get: "This paper reviews cancer biology study design, using examples that illustrate specific challenges and solutions." Notice how we strip that sentence of all the garbage to get it down just to the important words, just to the words that get the idea across. Alright, here's a second example. "As it is well known, increased athletic activity has been related to a profile of lower cardiovascular risk, lower blood pressure levels, and improved muscular and cardio-respiratory performance." You can see again that this sentence has a lot of extra words. It starts with As it is well known. This is an introductory phrase that you simply don't need. It's just the authors clearing their throat at the beginning of a sentence. We can strike that altogether. If you want to indicate that something is well-known, just indicate that by putting citations, by putting references at the end of the sentence. Then we get "increased athletic activity has been related to," this is just stylistic, but I kind of prefer is associated with. I like that better. And then we get to "a profile of lower cardiovascular risk." Well, a profile of, again, is one of those vague phrases that just doesn't add anything. We don't lose anything by crossing that out and just saying lower cardiovascular risk. Then we get to lower blood pressure levels. Well, again, that word levels is not necessary. We can just say lower blood pressure. And finally, we get to improved muscular and cardio-respiratory performance. Well, that's just a fancy way of saying fitness. So I'm just going to cross all of that out and just say what I mean, which is fitness. So we get increased athletic activity is associated with lower cardiovascular risk Lower blood pressure and improved fitness. Notice how much clutter we've stripped away from that sentence. In this example though, I think we could even be more direct. I think we have adequate scientific evidence to state that increased athletic activity lowers cardiovascular risk and blood pressure and improves fitness. Of course this requires a higher level of evidence but I do think we can confidently say that exercise does have these direct effects. Here's one last example. "The experimental demonstration is the first of its kind and is a proof of principle for the concept of laser driven particle acceleration in a structure loaded vacuum." We'll jump right into this one. I think instead of the experimental demonstration, we can just say the experiment. Then we get to "is the first of its kind and is a proof of principle." Notice that we get two to be verbs, is and is. Those are boring verbs so maybe we can try to put a better verb in there. We also get the, first of its kind, and proof of principle. I think those are repetitive. It's kind of the same thing. So I'm going to change this to "the experiment provides the first proof of principle." Just condense that the first proof of principle. Then we get to "for the concept of laser driven particle acceleration". I dont think we need the "for the concept of," that's just extra words. So that's just a "proof of principle of laser driven particle acceleration." So we can get this one down to: "The experiment provides the first proof of principle of laser-driven particle acceleration in a structre-loaded vacuum." And i just want to acknowledge and thank Debra Biasca of the University of Colorado, Boulder who shared some writing examples and physics with me that appear in my slides. All right, I want you to get in the habit of cutting unnecessary words. You have to be vigilant and ruthless. Cutting your words is really hard, because you've invested all this effort to put your words on the page. You've wrestled with the sentence. It feels like you're negating that effort by going back and throwing those words away. Also, you may have read the sentence over in your head so many times that it starts to sound good. It starts to sound I'm like this is just the way it should be. Well, you're going to have to fight against this inertia and this complacency. You're going to have to actively train yourself to go back and take out all those unnecessary words. Try taking out all the extra words. Read the sentence and see how it's better. See how it conveys the same idea with more power. What I always tell students Is that you have the undo key as a crutch. You have the control Z, or the equivalent on a mac. So you can take those words out, read the sentence without them. if you don't like the new version, you can always control Z them back in. I can't tell you how many times I've done this myself. I've said Well, I really like that word very in there. I don't want to take it out. But I convinced myself to try the sentence without it, knowing that I could always control + z the word back in. And I've never put the word back in. It's always better without it. Here's another example, this is a perfectly good sentence. It reads "Brain injury incidence shows two peak periods in almost all reports: rates are the highest in young people and the elderly." that's fine. But compare that to: "Brain injury incidence peaks in the young and the elderly." See how much crisper, how much more power that second sentence has when we get rid of all the unnecessary words? Here are some common sources of clutter that you should be on the lookout for. First of all, dead weight words and phrases. As it is well known, as it is has been shown, it can be regarded that, it should be emphasized that. These are just the authors clearing their throats. They can be deleted altogether. Just provide citations to show that it's well known. Also, look out for empty words and phrases. these kinds of words don't add anything because they're so vague and empty. and I love this quote from William Zinsser, he says, some words and phrases are blobs. And that's really true, some words and phrases are so amorphous. They don't add anything. Also, look out for long words or phrases that could be short. Remember, "muscular and cardiorespiratory performance," just a fancy way to say fitness. You might as well use the short version. Look out for unnecessary jargon and acronyms. Muscular and cardiorespiratory performance again. Gliomagenesis, we saw that in an earlier module. miR, the use of acronyms. We want to avoid acronyms unless they're completely standard and well known throughout science. We also want to get rid of any extra repetition. We saw some examples of this earlier. We saw studies, examples. Illustrate and demonstrate. Challenges and difficulties. Successful solutions. That's an example where the adjective repeats what's already in the noun. So watch out for that kind of repetition. Finally, watch out for adverbs. Everybody loves to put in adverbs when they're talking in emails or on a first draft. You'll notice that I love adverbs in speaking. But in your writing I'm going to ask you to go back and take those out because they're almost never useful. They're just extra weight in your sentence. You are not making your idea or statement more powerful by adding that adverb. In fact, you're losing power. So, I want you to cut all those adverbs very, really, quite, basically, generally, and so on. Here are a few more examples of long words and phrases that could be short. I have tons of these examples, and we'll do some more for homework. A majority of, that could just be most. A number of, that's just many. Are of the same opinion, I love that one, that's just agree. Less frequently occurring, just say rare. All three of the, just say the three, you don't need the all. Give rise to, that's caused. 'Due to the fact that' that's just because, 'have an effect on' that's affect; you the idea. These words and phrases don't carry the main idea of the sentence, so they're just slowing your reader down. When you choose a long version when a short version would have done the same job. Here's an example that has a long phrase that could be shortened. "The expected prevalence of mental retardation, based on the assumption that intelligence is normally distributed, is about 2.5%." Well, another way to say "based on the assumption of" is just to say "if." If intelligence is normally distributed. Here's an example of repetition. This sentence has a repetition in it. "A robust cell-mediated immune response is necessary, and deficiency in this response predisposes and individual towards active TB." Notice how the two parts of this sentence actually say the same thing. One part says it's necessary, the other part says Is that bad things will happen if you don't have it. So we can convey the same idea here by just saying, "Deficiency in T-cell-mediated immune response predisposes an individual to active TB." We don't need the first part of that sentence. Here's a quote to end on... On cutting clutter. This is a great quote. Pascal says I have only made this letter rather long because I have not had time to make it shorter. My French is a little rusty so I won't try to pronounce it in French. But there's something to this, right. You've spent all this time writing this long sentence or paragraph or paper. But the last step of that, the final, most important step, is that you go back an make it shorter. You need to refine it; take out all the extra garbage, and get down to the essence of what you're trying to say. That's where the elegance in your writing comes in. Now most of you probably had courses in high school or college where you were told that you had to fill some minimum number of pages, maybe a ten page report. And at that age you probably did not have anywhere near ten pages of ideas. So you started to learn to pad your writing with a lot of extra words. You picked up this bad habit. Now I want you to break yourself of that habit and learn to strip your writing of everything that isn't necessary. Get it down to the key ideas. When you convey your ideas with the fewest words possible, your writing is more readable, engaging and powerful. And a former student in this course, John Hodges, was kind enough to find the original reference to this quote and shared it with me, so I want to share the original text with you here. Thanks, John, for digging this up. 

# 1.5 Cut the clutter, more tricks

In this next module, I'm going to give you a few more tricks for cutting clutter. These are small things but good little tips. So I'm going to review three things. How to eliminate negatives to get rid of nots from your sentences, how to get rid of superfluous uses of there are and there is, and how to omit needless prepositions. So starting with eliminating negatives. This is a great little tip that you may not have ever thought of before. But things like she was not often right. There's a way to turn that into a positive. You can say, she was usually wrong. Whenever you encounter a not in your writing, see if you can turn it into a positive. You can almost always do it, and it's usually much clearer when you use the positive construction. For example, she did not want to perform the experiment incorrectly. You can see that there is a double negative here which is confusing. So how would we turn that one into a positive? You would just say, she wanted to perform the experiment correctly. That's obviously much clearer. Or how about, they did not believe the drug was harmful. How would you turn that into a positive? You would say, they believed the drug was safe. So there's almost always a way to turn a negative into a positive. Instead of not honest, you can say dishonest. Instead of not harmful, say safe. Not important, you can just say unimportant. Does not have, that's lacks. Did not remember, you can say forgot. Did not pay attention to, say ignored, did not succeed, failed, you get the idea. So pay attention to this in your writing. Sometimes you have to be a little clever about it, but if you think about it carefully, you can usually find a way to put it in the positive. Also, pay attention to superfluous uses of there are and there is. Here's a simple example. There are many ways in which we can arrange the pulleys. On first read, you may feel like the there are is needed, but it's really not. We can just say, we can arrange the pulleys in many ways. You can drop the the there are all together. Here's another example, there was a long line of bacteria on the plate. How can we get rid of the there was here? How about if we just say, bacteria lined the plate. You can see by getting rid of the there was, we get a much more exciting verb, lined, rather than a to be verb, was. Or try, there are many physicists who like to write. You can just cut the there are completely without re-arranging the sentence at all. Instead of saying there are many physicists who like to write, just say many physicists like to write. The there are was completely unnecessary. Or the data confirm that there is an association between vegetables and cancer. You can change that to the data confirm an association between vegetables and cancer. So when you find yourself writing a there is or a there are or a there was, check and make sure that it's really necessary. A lot of times, you can get rid of it. Finally, another thing that I want you to start paying attention to are needless prepositions. Often prepositions like that and on are completely unnecessary. And when you have to get your word count down like in an abstract, this is a good place to strip some extra words. For example, the meeting happened on Monday. Well, actually that on is unnecessary, you could just say the meeting happened Monday, you don't lose anything. Or they agreed that it was true, just say, they agreed it was true, you don't need the that. So you can often get rid of extraneous prepositions. You might think you need them. But if you take them out, you realize that you actually don't. 

### 1.6 Practicing cutting clutter

The best way to learn writing is through practice. So in this next module, you're gonna get some practical experience cutting clutter. I'll put up a sentence, and then I'll have you pause the video and try editing it on your own. Then you can restart the video and I'll show you how I would edit that sentence so you can compare your edits to mine. And we'll do this for several sentences. So the first sentence reads, "Anti-inflammatory drugs may be protective for the occurrence of Alzheimer's disease." So I want you to think about all the extra words that you can cut out of that sentence. See how many you can cut. So pause the video now and try to edit this sentence and then I'll show you how I edited it. Great. So when I edited this sentence, I read it through and I said "Anti-inflammatory drugs may be protective for the occurrence of". I found that part to be quite wordy. So rather than "be protective for", how about just "may protect against". Now we don't really need "the occurrence of", we "may protect against Alzheimer's disease". Right? We don't need "the occurrence of". So "Anti-inflammatory drugs may protect against Alzheimer's disease." So hopefully you had a similar rewrite. Obviously, you might have done slightly different things and always feel free to email if you've got a better rewrite that you want to share with the class. Sometimes, I might miss a few words that could still be edited out. So here's the second example. "Clinical seizures have been estimated to occur in 0.5% to 2.3% of the neonatal population". So now, pause the video and edit that sentence on your own. Great. So now I'm gonna go through my edit on this sentence. So, "Clinical seizures have been estimated to occur." Well that seems like a lot of extra words. How about we just get rid of the "have been estimated to" and just say "clinical seizures occur". Now, some of you may feel like that's being too direct. Right? You want to put the hedge word that it's "been estimated to be". We don't want to be so direct as to say "it occurs". But notice that in the statistics in this sentence, the 0.5% to 2.3%, that's a range. So it's obvious immediately to the reader that you're talking about estimates because you've presented the reader with a range of possible different values. So I think in this case it's OK to just say clinical seizures occur, and then, of course, we can give the references for those numbers at the end of the sentence. We don't need all this "have been estimated to". And then we get to "occur in 0.5% to 2.3% of the neonatal population". Now you might have thought, oh, neonatal population, that sounds really important. I better leave it untouched. And in fact, the first time I edited this sentence, I missed this. But what is a neonatal population? So, neo means new, nate means born, so this is just a fancy way of saying newborns. See how much more direct and easy that is to read? "Clinical seizures occur in 0.5% to 2.3% of newborns." And then, of course, we want to have some references at the end of that sentence. So, hopefully, you've got something similar. Again, you may not have an identical rewrite to mine, but hopefully you have something similar. So the next example reads, "Ultimately p53 guards not only against malignant transformation but also plays a role in developmental processes as diverse as aging, differentiation, and fertility." So now pause the video and try editing that sentence on your own. OK, so now I'm gonna go through my edit on this sentence. So, "Ultimately P53 guards not only against malignant transformation." How about we say instead of that – malignant transformation is just talking about cancer, so how about "Besides preventing", guarding against is just a way to say preventing. "Besides preventing cancer, p53 also plays", I'm gonna make this roles, because we're talking about more than one role, "plays roles in developmental processes as diverse as". Well, I don't think I need to say all of that. That doesn't really add much. So "plays roles", how about just "plays roles in aging, differentiation, infertility". It's kind of understood that that's a diverse range of things. So "Besides preventing cancer, p53 also plays roles in aging, differentiation, and fertility." See how much we could strip out of that sentence without losing the meaning? So here's the next one. "Injuries to the brain and spinal cord have long been known to be among the most devastating and expensive of all injuries to treat medically." So pause the video and edit that sentence on your own. All right. So here is my edit for this sentence. So, "Injuries to the brain and spinal cord have long been known to be." So that's kind of a long way of saying are, they are. Now, the fact that they, you know, it's been known for a long time, again, maybe you're gonna put some references to indicate that, but we don't really need a long verb like that. So just, "Injuries to the brain and spinal cord are", we don't need this "to be" here. So, "are among the most devastating and expensive". And then we get this little bit of repetition, "of all injuries to treat medically". Well, when we're saying they're devastating and expensive, it's kind of assumed that we're talking about their medical treatment. Right? So I don't think we need any of this. So we just say – and of course the injuries is repetitive – so we just say "Injuries to the brain and spinal cord are among the most devastating and expensive." Period. You, again, may have slightly different rewrites than this, but hopefully you have something somewhat similar. Here's the next one. "An IQ test measures an individual's abilities to perform functions that usually fall in the domains of verbal communication, reasoning, and performance on tasks that represent motor and spatial capabilities." You can hear a lot of extra words in there. So pause the video for a moment and edit that sentence. All right. So here is what I did on this sentence. So, "An IQ test measures an individuals" and then we get, "abilities to perform functions that usually fall in the domains". This is kind of very wordy. How about we just get to what the test measures. "An IQ test measures an individual's", I'm gonna get rid of all of this. An IQ test basically measures an individual's verbal abilities, right? So we could just say that at the end. "An IQ test measures an individuals verbal". I don't think we need communication after verbal, right, because that's just repetitive. "Verbal, reasoning" and then we get "performance on tasks that represent." How about we say it more directly, that they're measuring their "motor and spatial capabilities". And perhaps there are more than one type of IQ test, so we might want to use the word or here, 'cause not every IQ test measures all three, but some may measure any one of these. So, "An IQ test measures an individual's verbal, reasoning, or motor and spatial capabilities." So again, hopefully in your rewrite, you've got something similar and you were able to strip a lot of those excess words out. OK, one last example here. It says, "As we can see from Figure two, if the return kinetic energy is less than 3.2 U_p, there will be two electron trajectories associated with this kinetic energy." So go ahead and pause the video and edit that on your own, and then we'll talk about it afterwards. So let me show you my edit for this sentence. Again, you may not get exactly the same thing, but hopefully you're cutting a lot of the same words. So, "As we can see from Figure two", let's just say, "Figure two shows". In fact, this little "As we can see from" is just kind of a lot of extra words. We can just say directly "Figure two shows" or we could even just reference Figure two in parentheses at the end of the sentence. "Figure two shows, if the return kinetic energy is less than 3.2". Let's just say, "Figure two shows that a return to kinetic energy less than 3.2 U_p". That's, kind of, now the subject of the sentence, the subject of this clause, that a return kinetic energy less than 3.2. How about it just that it "yields two electron trajectories". We don't need to repeat that kinetic energy. So, something like, "Figure two shows that a return kinetic energy less than 3.2 U_p yields two electron trajectories."   